Emily Miller
PS03 Discussion

	Cathy O’Neal makes the argument that recidivism risk algorithms that measure the likelihood for a given criminal defendant to return to prison reinforce inequality. These algorithms are given to a judge during sentencing and based upon the algorithm output the judge can decide to give a longer or shorter prison sentence. However, Cathy O’Neal makes the argument that these algorithms create a feedback loop, as a longer term in jail creates fewer prospects when a person leaves jail and fewer ties to the community. In simple terms, when a person is  labeled as high risk by the recidivism risk algorithm, they may become high risk. Furthermore, the recidivism risk algorithm is a biased algorithm. The algorithm is a logistic model that has been trained and returns the probability of a person returning to prison after being released. However, the data that the training is based on use questions that are proxies for race and class as well as a count of prior interactions with police. This creates a biased data set as there are more police interactions in poor and minority communities. The questionnaire also asks questions such as “Did you come from a high crime neighborhood?” and “Do family members in your family have interactions with the police?”, both questions that would be unconstitutional to ask in an open court. However, these questions and the biased data set get through because the only output is a score. If biased data go into an algorithm, a biased output will be produced.
	O’Neal then goes on to give a thought experiment about hiring in tech companies. The thought experiment is the following: a tech company decides they need to hire more engineers and they want to hire the best engineers. They decide to base their hiring algorithm to select for individuals that they think will do well at their company, based upon the characteristics of engineers currently at the company who are high-performing. If at this company there are no women currently employed as engineers, the algorithm then learns to reject any resume where the applicant is female. This is another instance of a biased data set leading to a biased output.
	There are other algorithms used in teacher evaluations. Most teacher evaluations in public schools are based upon standardized test scores and improvement. Teachers are judged upon how much their students improve upon their scores from last year. For instance, if a student enters 6th grade performing at the 80th percentile based upon their 5th grade test scores, and then tests at the end of 6th grade as performing in the 84th percentile, the teacher would have a positive feedback of increasing that student’s performance by 4 percent. O’Neal’s argument is that there is a feedback loop of better performing students gaining more resources than those who are lower performing. While I agree with that, I’d like to make an argument about standardized test scores based upon my own public school experiences. I think O’Neal did not consider how these score based teacher evaluations effect students at the top as well. If a student tests in the 99th percentile one year, there is nowhere to go the next year but down a percentile or stay within the same percentile. In my public schools there was tracking based upon your standardized test scores so that everyone above the 99th percentile was tracked into a separate class. I was in that class. When it comes to test scores, the teachers always complained about teaching us because they knew their evaluations would come back negative because it would be impossible for that class to do any better than their scores from the previous year. Judging teacher performance based upon standardized test performance is a ridiculous system that fails to provide an accurate judgment of teaching abilities. 
